[GS] New: Post about environment variables (#34)
bitsandvolts/bitsandvolts.github.io: _posts/2021-12-21-gs_00005_environment_variables.md

---
layout: single
title: Environment Variables
category: Getting Started
permalink: /categories/getting_started/environment_variables
excerpt: "What they are and why they are useful"
author: Bjoern Hartmann
toc: true
toc_label: "Content"
toc_sticky: true
toc_icon: "align-justify"
sidebar:
  nav: "getting_started_0"
header:
  overlay_color: "#000"
  overlay_filter: "0.5"
  overlay_image: /assets/images/getting_started.jpg
---

> We are glad that you are still following us on our journey. In our first

Reviewer: Maybe use "!" to sound more exciting:
```suggestion
We are glad that you are still following us on our journey! In our first
```

[post](/categories/getting_started/computer_setup), we explained how to set up
your personal Linux machine. Then, we demonstrated essential commands to control
your computer in [Terminal Basics](/categories/getting_started/terminal_basics)
and [Terminal Basics II](/categories/getting_started/terminal_basics2). Lastly,
we implemented our first
[Basic Shell Script](/categories/getting_started/basic_shell_scripts). In our
opinion, this is all you need for a smooth beginner's dive into the Linux world.

> But wait ... There are two topics we mentioned in the previous post but did not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But wait ... There are two topics we mentioned in the previous post which we didn't explain yet.
```

that surround someone. For example, the place you are living in is the
environment for your daily life.

Now, let's give an easy example of an environment variable. Imagine two
different locations, one in Alaska and one in California. One possible variable
for the environment could be the temperature. There you have it! An
**environment variable** is a variable that describes an environment. Depending
on the temperature you probably will wear different clothes. So, you will behave
differently depending on the variable. But what does this has to do with
computers? Similar to you wearing different clothes at different locations, a
computer program might do something different in a different environment, which
could be a different machine, different operating system, or simply a different
setting. We are going to discuss some examples to make it clear.

# List environment variables

In the previous [post](/categories/getting_started/basic_shell_scripts), we
already mentioned the **PATH** variable. It holds paths to directories where
programs (executables) are stored. You can list the content of the variable
using:

    $ echo $PATH

> 'echo' is the command to display text in the terminal, the '$' indicates that

Reviewer: Which $? The first, or the second one? (could be confusing for a newbie, maybe remind them that the first is just the shell prompt)

Author: better?

the following is a variable and 'PATH' is the variable name. The output is a

> list of directories concatenated by a colon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
list of directories separated by a colon:
```
It's more "separated" than concatenated, right?

<figure class="img-center" style="width:90%">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_00005_path.jpg" alt="">
</figure>

Let's try another example. Imagine you want to write a program that displays a

> file in an editor. So far, we used nano as an editor, but can you be sure that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
file in an editor. So far, we used **nano** as an editor, but can you be sure that
```
To make the "Eigenname" clear. Or just anything else than bold (e.g. italics, or code format).

this is installed on the target machine? Maybe the user prefers another editor!
A better way would be to read the 'EDITOR' variable and use the value as editor.
Unfortunately, there is no guarantee that the variable is set, but this shall
not be a topic for now. Check out how it is set for you:

    $ echo $EDITOR

> You can list all your environment variables by using:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also list all your environment variables by using:
```

    $ printenv

As we mentioned earlier, there is no guarantee that a specific variable is set

> for your session, however, there are some common environment variables that are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for your session. However, there are some common environment variables that are
```

> set on most Linux systems, such as 'PATH', 'EDITOR', 'SHELL', or 'USER'. Of

Reviewer: I would use backticks here, so the words look like code:
```suggestion
set on most Linux systems, such as `PATH`, `EDITOR`, `SHELL`, or `USER`. Of
```

course, you can change the value of any variable or create a new one as we will
show in the following.

# Set environment variables

Let's try to reuse the 'open_firefox.sh' script from the last
[post](/categories/getting_started/basic_shell_scripts). In case, you do not
have it anymore, we recreate it in the following. Change to your home directory
(using an environment variable) and create the file:

    $ cd $HOME              # this is the same as 'cd ~' or simply 'cd'
    $ nano open_firefox.sh

Enter the following script:

    #!/bin/bash

    # Print something to the terminal
    echo "Greetings from Bits&Volts (bitsandvolts.org)"

    # Open firefox
    firefox -new-tab -url bitsandvolts.org \
            -new-tab -url https://github.com/bitsandvolts/getting_started &

Add the correct privilege (this will be explained in the next post!):

    $ chmod +x open_firefox.sh

> In our last post, we have already seen that it cannot be run the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our last post, we have already seen that invoking the script as follows doesn't work:
```

    $ open_firefox.sh

The reason is that the script is not stored at a location that is part of the
'PATH' variable, so it cannot be found. Solution number one was to add the

> script's path, which is your home directory, to the 'PATH' variable. This can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
script's path, which is in this case your home directory, to the 'PATH' variable. This can be
```

> done by using the 'export' command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
done by using the `export` command:
```
I won't mention this for all occurrences, but I highly suggest to use backticks for all command names, variables. So they get rendered as code, and thus stand out from the rest.

    $ export PATH=$HOME

Here, you set the value of 'PATH' to the content of the 'HOME' variable. If you
display the content,

    $ echo $PATH

you should see that it changed.

<figure class="img-center" style="width:90%">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_00005_export.jpg" alt="">
</figure>

Now, try to run the script again as before:

    $ open_firefox.sh

<figure class="img-center" style="width:90%">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_00005_firefox.jpg" alt="">
</figure>

> The script can be found, but now we get the error that firefox cannot be found.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The script can be found, but now we get an error that firefox cannot be found?!
```
That would express the reaction better, wouldn't it? :D

Hmm ... It is the same script as we used in the last post and there it worked.

> What can be wrong? Can you guess? We have overwritten the 'PATH' variable so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What went wrong? Can you guess? The answer is: we have overwritten the 'PATH' variable so
```

that it solely consists of your home directory. Since firefox is not located

> there, it cannot be found. By the way, none of the Linux commands we've learned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there, it cannot be found. By the way, also none of the Linux commands we've learned
```

> works. Have a try:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will not work anymore! Have a try:
```

    $ ls        # does not work

>     $ /bin/ls   # call by absolute path works

Reviewer: I would put the call by abs path in a separate code block, and put the comment in the actual blog text. Like:

> However, calling a command by its _absolute_ path works:
(code block)

Author: better?

> Close and reopen the terminal. Again, print the value of the 'PATH' variable:

Reviewer: I would before maybe add something like

> Does that mean, we now broke our Linux?? Well, luckily no. Simply close and reopen...

    $ echo $PATH

> You should note that it has its original value. So, using the export command as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should see that it has its original value back. Whew. So, using the export command as
```

> we did before changes the value only for the current terminal session. A new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we did before changes the value only for the _current_ terminal session. A new
```

session will reinitialize all values. Now, we use the 'export' command slightly
different:

    $ export PATH=$HOME:$PATH

What does that do? Again we set the value of the 'PATH' variable. We've already
mentioned that the directories in the 'PATH' variable are separated by a colon.
So, we set the value to the home folder separated by a colon to the previous
value of the 'PATH' variable. We simply _add_ another directory. This time, the

> script will work:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
script will work (and any other Linux command):
```

    $ open_firefox.sh

# Permanent change

> There is one issue left. The setting stays only for the current session. What if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is one issue left. As we saw, the path setting stays active only for the current session. What if
```

> you want to have it changed permanently? We do not want to dive too deep into

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you want to have it changed _permanently_? We do not want to dive too deep into
```

this for now, but we should mention that, when you open a terminal, several

> scripts are executed automatically. For example, ~/.bashrc (reminder: ~ stands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
scripts are executed automatically behind the scenes. For example, ~/.bashrc (reminder: ~ stands
```
To make it clear, that the user will not see any of the scripts being executed.

> for your home directory) is one of them.

Reviewer: > ~ is a shorthand for your home directory

> 

Reviewer: > When you want to extend the `PATH` variable whenever you open a new terminal, you can put the export command into the `bashrc`. Open it:

    $ nano ~/.bashrc

and add the 'export' command to the end of the file.

    $ export PATH=$HOME:$PATH

Save and close the file. Then, reopen your terminal and display the 'PATH'
variable.

    $ echo $PATH

> Your home directory should be the first one.

Reviewer: Maybe some kind of "outro" like this?
```suggestion
Your home directory should be the first one. Now, you can instantly run the `open_firefox.sh` script from every terminal you open, and from any location. Keep the PATH variable in mind the next time you write a script, it can save you a lot of time!
```

Author: Just a note for me: Outro is good. Just would add the hint that its not a good solution to always add the path to the PATH variable

Author: better?

<figure class="img-center" style="width:90%">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_00005_bashrc.jpg" alt="">
</figure>

> 

Reviewer: What about adding a small section mentioning that you can also create any custom named env variable?

Author: good idea

Author: like this?
